KEP-3726: standard-application-protocols (#3727)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-network/3726-standard-application-protocols/README.md

* In GKE you can use `appProtocol: HTTP2` and it will describe HTTP2 over TLS (https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/secure-gateway#load-balancer-tls).
* While in Istio it will be h2c (HTTP2 over cleartext).

That creates a problem where users with GKE and Istio in their cluster can have very different behaviors for the same `appProtocol` value.

### Goals

* Build consensus around how common (non IANA service names) should be implemented
* Help the broader community and specifically implementations to interoperate better
* Provide short and clear documentation for how appProtocol values should be implemented
  * Update the appProtocol user documentation respectively

### Non-Goals

* Validate appProtocol values
* Monitor `appProtocol implementations

## Proposal

Kubernetes supports the `appProtocol` field to provide a way to specify an application protocol for each Service port.

The [documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#application-protocol) for this field says that:

```Values should either be IANA standard service names or domain prefixed names such as mycompany.com/my-custom-protocol.```

> This KEP proposes to declare standard Kubernetes protocol names for common protocols that are not IANA standard service names.

Reviewer: where is going to live this list?

Reviewer: I think that the KEP should answer the where, who and how this list is going to be created, maintained, ... what are the requirements ... or we can be bikeshedding for years for each protocol

Reviewer 2: I think the list is small enough that it could live in the spec for AppProtocol, but open to alternatives

Reviewer: Do you keep the list versioned matching Kubernetes releases? i.e. the list in 1.26 only applies to 1.26 or the previous one too?

Reviewer 2: Yeah I don't think there's any reason this needs to be versioned, but I also can't think of any other place this could fit. Agree that the KEP needs to define the requirements for protocols that get this status.

Author: If I understand correctly(please correct me if not), you are suggesting to have a new repo with standard names and/or structured metadata in it for various things in k8s.

While this can be a good idea, how will we use it for this case? 
We cannot validate the `AppProtocol` field name against it because we are not aware of whether the provided string for this field is an IANA service name, custom impl-specific prefixed name OR something unsupported.

maybe we can reference to the relevant parts of this registry from the field description or from the docs though.

Reviewer: are we diligent enough to maintain another repo? 
how do we "enforce" devs to register everything in the new repo?
it looks to me that the idea is good but it got outdated soon, I can see how docs and release folks do a lot of work chasing people to update things.
I like the idea of being in-tree and use some of your "makefile" magic @thockin , that also will allow to be in ` importable Go form`

Reviewer 3: I'll slap together a basic KEP

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3787

Those common protocols will be well defined strings prefixed with ‘k8s.io’. 
`k8s.io/h2c` as an example.

> ### list of protocols

Reviewer 4: Especially h2 vs h2c, and why we even need h2 when TLS already provides a mechanism for negotiating protocol

> ### list of protocols

Reviewer 2: In this case the relevant RFC includes clear definitions of both h2 and h2c (https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7540#section-3.1), I think it makes sense to copy those concepts and link out to the RFC. Although there is a mechanism for negotiating protocol, at least some implementations also provide a way to explicitly specify h2 or h2c.

> ### list of protocols

Reviewer 4: I guess a broader topic is - what happens when there is limited support.

For example, Istio cannot implement something that says "This is HTTPS, but it must be HTTP/2". But we could do "HTTPS", which is probably good enough for 99% of the users declaring "H2"... but then for that 1% of users, we didn't meet their demand (used HTTP/1 when they wanted h2). Alternatively, we could decide "This is H2, we can't always give that behavior, so we ignore it".

Hope that makes sense...

> ### list of protocols

Reviewer 2: In my opinion this is a good reason to make this a list of protocols supported by the underlying application. That feels like a follow up though. The scope of this KEP is really just trying to fill gaps in IANA Standard Service names which feels like it should be relatively non-controversial, even though we admit that follow up efforts will be needed to solve the larger problem.

> ### list of protocols

Reviewer 3: I didn't follow the example or the argument for a list, can you do it again but slower?

> ### list of protocols

Author: I think I caused a confusion. 

This line is **"List of supported/standard protocols"** and it is **not** about changing the field to a list (which is suggested later in the followup work section)

I will rename this line to supported protocols.

To answer your question @thockin ; The idea is to declare standard protocol names for common protocols that are not IANA service names. That way in the current version of the field, implementations (istio/GKE etc etc) that implement non IANA service names like `http2` will be able to coexist. (without these standards they would need `gke.io/http2` and `istio.io/http2` and since `AppProtocol` is a string field now it can have only one of the options)

Probably for that reason most of the implementations support non prefixed app protocol names that are not IANA (and that should not be the case) - [istio as an example](https://github.com/istio/istio/blob/master/pkg/config/protocol/instance.go#L65-L94)

There is a suggested followup work to turn this field to a list instead of a string and truly support implementations to interoperate. (lets say two different impl specific prefixed protocols OR one impl specific prefixed and one not prefixed etc)

- 'k8s.io/h2c'
- 'k8s.io/h2'
- 'k8s.io/grpc'

> - 'k8s.io/grpc-web'

Reviewer 2: I agree that grpc-web is probably not prevalent enough to be a part of this list, so probably worth pulling that out.

With that said, I think it's important to distinguish that these app protocols represent concepts that are recognized but not implemented by Kubernetes. AppProtocol exists as a hint to implementations adding functionality on top of the Kubernetes Service spec. I look at this KEP as defining terms that we expect will be commonly used and broadly understood but are not already defined as an IANA service name.

> - 'k8s.io/grpc-web'

Reviewer 5: > Even gRPC - do we need to distinguish from h2?

The API docs say:

```
	// The application protocol for this port.
	// This field follows standard Kubernetes label syntax.
	// Un-prefixed names are reserved for IANA standard service names (as per
	// RFC-6335 and https://www.iana.org/assignments/service-names).
	// Non-standard protocols should use prefixed names such as
	// mycompany.com/my-custom-protocol.
```

The user docs say:

> The `appProtocol` field provides a way to specify an application protocol for each Service port. The value of this field is mirrored by the corresponding Endpoints and EndpointSlice objects.
> 
> This field follows standard Kubernetes label syntax. Values should either be [IANA standard service names](https://www.iana.org/assignments/service-names) or domain prefixed names such as `mycompany.com/my-custom-protocol`.

So the answer to your question is: **???** None of the docs explain what the field actually _for_, or who is expected to use it, for what, so how could we say whether it's important to distinguish grpc from generic h2?

- 'k8s.io/tls'

> - 'k8s.io/tcp'

Author: Do we think all of them are needed?

Alternatively, are there protocols I missed?

Reviewer 2: I think I'd drop `grpc-web` (not prevalent enough), and `tcp` (duplicative of port protocol). I'm also not sure how `tls` would differ in practice from `https` that's already defined as an IANA standard name, so I think it could make sense to leave that off as well.

Reviewer 4: `tcp` is not duplicative.

HTTP:
```
appProtocol: k8s.io/HTTP
protocol: TCP
```

"Who knows, do whatever you want":
```
protocol: TCP
```

"This is definitely TCP"
```
appProtocol: k8s.io/TCP #might be IANA though, not sure prefix is needed
protocol: TCP
```

I know at least Istio and Linkerd treat these 3 cases differently

Author: You mean that here Istio tries to sniff and guess the app protocol 
```
protocol: TCP
```

and here it does not? 
```
appProtocol: k8s.io/TCP # it is unprefixed "tcp" in the current istio support
protocol: TCP
```

Reviewer 4: Yes. if the duplicative "TCP" is confusing, you can also think of it as 

```
appProtocol: k8s.io/opaque-bytestream # it is unprefixed "tcp" in the current istio support
protocol: TCP
```

Based on the list size, we might revisit this decision in the future and suggest an alternative location.

Proposed changes to the API spec:

```go
type ServicePort struct {
  ... 
  ...

  // The application protocol for this port.
  // This field follows standard Kubernetes label syntax.
  // Valid values are either:
  //
  // * Un-prefixed protocol names - reserved for IANA standard service names (as per
  // RFC-6335 and https://www.iana.org/assignments/service-names).
  //
  // * Kubernetes standard names:
  //   * 'k8s.io/h2' - http2 over TLS 
  //   * 'k8s.io/h2c' - http2 over cleartext TCP 
  //   * 'k8s.io/grpc' - grpc traffic
  //
  // * Other protocols should use prefixed names such as
  // mycompany.com/my-custom-protocol.
  // +optional
  AppProtocol *string
```

same wording for type `EndpointPort`

### Adding new protocols

In order to be included in the list, a new protocol must:
* Not be an [IANA standard service name](https://www.iana.org/assignments/service-names)
* Run on top of L4 protocol supported by Kubernetes Service
* Be supported in more than three implementations

> * Be well defined and broadly used

Reviewer 5: So this does nothing to stop us from running into the "gke `HTTP2` vs Istio `HTTP2`" problem for new protocols in the future; we have to get three possibly-incompatible implementations first before we're allowed to fix things...

Adding `k8s.io/h2` and `k8s.io/h2c` solves the _specific_ problem that led to this KEP, but we're still leaving the foot gun fully armed for future users.

Author: If implementations follow the docs they should not support unprefixed protocols that are not IANA service names. That means that should do "istio.io/<protocol>" or gke.io/<protocol> if the protocol is not IANA standard name. 

I agree that 3 may not be ideal, also the domain prefixed protocol make it impossible for implementations to coexist and support not IANA standard name. For that @robscott suggested future work to turn this field to a list.

When this happens, implementations could truly interoperate. However the field name is no longer appropriate (it is debatable if it was before) since it is not longer the "application protocol" it is more of a hint to the implementations on how to forward the traffic to the application.

Reviewer 2: Yeah I think the ultimate solution is going to be a list that supports multiple values here since there's probably always going to be some implementation specific values.

Reviewer 3: Would it be sufficient to say "at least two in-progress implementations of components which would use this protocol" ?

Author: changed it to two or more. 
Does "in progress" is enough for us? I think we'd want to add another standard protocol only when we know there is a real need for it and it is fully supported

Author: Yeah, though until it is a list I see Tim's and Dan's point where users will use istio.io/custom or something else and then they would need to migrate to k8s.io
And implementation will need to support both for backward compatibility.

Reviewer: if we define the field as an url we can also apply url rules to implement compatibility.  
We can use subdomains to define implementations, and paths to define protocols , it can also allow to do composition for protocols that tunnels  `<implementation>.k8s.io/<protocol1>/<protocol>`

Per example 

```
istio.k8s.io/http/v2
```

will mean the http v2 implementation from istio, when the standard one will be `k8s.io/http/v2`

Something more complex

```
gateway.k8s.io/websocket/sip
```

that means the implementation of SIP over Websocket (I just learned about this recently, no idea it was a thing :)

Reviewer 3: Would Istio and GKE even qualify for the "two implementations" rule?  They used the same name but for different meanings.  If they had both followed the rules and used their own prefixes, we would only have 1 implementation of h2c and one of h2, right?

Perhaps add this as an UNRESOLVED and let's get this merged so we can debate the fine points.

Author: Agreed, I have added this as UNRESOLVED.

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> There are cases where implementations implement different things for the same application protocol names. That already causes(and can cause more in the future) issues for certain implementations to interoperate. (see example with GKE and Istio under [Motivation](#motivation))

Reviewer 2: Tiny Nits:
```suggestion
There are cases where implementations implement different things for the same application protocol names. That has already caused issues for certain implementations to interoperate, with the possibility of more in the future. (See the example with GKE and Istio under [Motivation](#motivation))
```

This KEP suggests a different description for the `AppProtocol` field and proposes to declare standard Kubernetes protocol names for common protocols that are not IANA service names.

## Motivation

> The lack of direct support for specifying application protocols for ports and the widespread use of implementation-specific annotations to mitigate it had led k8s to add the `AppProtocol` field to the port spec.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The lack of direct support for specifying application protocols for ports and the widespread use of implementation-specific annotations to mitigate it had led Kubernetes to add the `AppProtocol` field to the port spec.
```

> While this is a good solution - we never came with recommended standards other than [IANA standard service names](https://www.iana.org/assignments/service-names) or a domain prefixed protocol.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While this is a good solution - [IANA standard service names](https://www.iana.org/assignments/service-names) do not define some very common protocols.
```

This loose definition has led us to;
1. Have instances where implementations do different things for common protocols.
2. Have no support for implementations interoperability with different domain prefixed protocols (or a mix domain prefixed and non prefixed protocol) for the same port.

One good example for the first bullet is `HTTP2`. 

> * In GKE you can use `appProtocol: HTTP2` and it will describe HTTP2 over TLS (https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/secure-gateway#load-balancer-tls).

Author: Correct ideally that should not be used by anyone, but the fact is that different implementations are using it.
I have provided more context here - https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3727#discussion_r1087712029

## Proposal

~~Kubernetes supports the `appProtocol` field to provide a way to specify an application protocol for each Service port.~~

Kubernetes `appProtocol` field is used as a hint for implementations to configure the protocol used between the implementation and the application it exposes.

The [documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#application-protocol) for this field says that:

```Values should either be IANA standard service names or domain prefixed names such as mycompany.com/my-custom-protocol.```

This KEP proposes to declare standard Kubernetes protocol names for common protocols that are not IANA standard service names.

Those common protocols will be well defined strings prefixed with ‘k8s.io’. 
`k8s.io/h2c` as an example.

### list of protocols
- 'k8s.io/http2'
- 'k8s.io/grpc'
- 'k8s.io/tcp'

### Risks and Mitigations

There are no real “risks”, primary concerns are:
1. End users will not migrate to `k8s.io/<>` values
2. It will take long time to implementations align with the new standards
3. We have no easy way to monitor who is aligned and who is not

## Design Details

> At first, the list is going to live in `ServicePort` and `EndpointPort` as part of the AppProtocol description.

Reviewer 3: What is "the list" ?

Reviewer 3: Oh, the list of protocols?  Let's jusmp straight to metadata.

Author: I have changed the wording a bit

> Based on the list size, we might revisit this decision in the future and suggest an alternative location.

Reviewer 2: I think we should remove any changes to a list from the scope of this KEP.

Author: List as list of supported protocols not as turning AppProtocol to a list

Author: as per Antonio's comment here https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3727#discussion_r1068776937

Author: changed the wording to avoid confusion

Proposed changes to the API spec:

```go
type ServicePort struct {
  ... 
  ...

  // Used as a hint for implementations to
  // configure the protocol used between the
  // implementation and the application it exposes.
  // This field follows standard Kubernetes label syntax.
  // Valid values are either:
  //
  // * Un-prefixed protocol names - reserved for IANA standard service names (as per
  // RFC-6335 and https://www.iana.org/assignments/service-names).
  //
  // * Kubernetes standard names:
  //   * 'k8s.io/http2' - http2 over cleartext, aka 'h2c'. https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7540
  //   * 'k8s.io/grpc' - grpc traffic - see https://github.com/grpc/grpc/blob/v1.51.1/doc/PROTOCOL-HTTP2.md
  //   * 'k8s.io/tcp' - plain tcp traffic
  //
  // * Other protocols should use prefixed names such as
  // mycompany.com/my-custom-protocol.
  // +optional
  AppProtocol *string
```

same wording for type `EndpointPort`

### Adding new protocols

In order to be included in the list, a new protocol must:
* Not be an [IANA standard service name](https://www.iana.org/assignments/service-names)
* Run on top of L4 protocol supported by Kubernetes Service

> * Be supported in more than three implementations

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should loosen this requirement
```suggestion
* Be supported in two or more implementations
```

> * Be supported in more than three implementations

Reviewer 3: implementations of ... ?

* Be well defined and broadly used

### Followup work
To support implementations interoperability with different domain prefixed protocols (or a mix domain prefixed and non prefixed protocol) for the same port we need to turn `AppProtocol` to a list.

> It is likely to be an API change but design details TBD.
> ### Documentation change

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is likely to be an API change but design details TBD.

### Documentation change
```
